---
layout: post
title: "Even-Chen et al 2017: Augmenting intracortical brain-machine interface with neurally driven error detectors"
date: 2017-12-04
comments: false
tags: 
- BMI
- Shenoy
- error-related_potentials
- Reward_Modulations
---

[Augmenting intracortical brain-machine interface with neurally driven error detectors](http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1741-2552/aa8dc1/meta)

Detecting errors (outcome-error or execution-error) while performing tasks via BMI from the same cortical populations can improve BMI performance through error prevention and decoder adaptation. Justin Sanchez was one of the earliest proponents of this idea and had several theoretical work on it. Joseph Francis conducted studies on detecting reward-signal in the M1 and PMd in monkeys in 2015 and continues now. There have been multiple studies on detecting these error-signals in humans, via ECoG or EEG. The detection of error-signal or reward-signal, which can be closely related, in motor and premotor areas have been rising in popularity owing to its implication to improve BMI.

It looks like Nir Even-Chen has gotten this very important first flag (with experimental paradigm pretty similar to what I wanted to do as well, so at least my hypothesis is validated).

## Experiment

Monkey first performed arm-reach to move a cursor to different target. This training data was used to fit either a ReFIT decoder (requiring a second decoder fitting) or just a regular FIT decoder. Both decoders are velocity Kalman Filters that utilized intention estimation when fitting the training data.

During the BMI task, whenever a cursor overlaps a target, it starts a **300ms hold period**. The color of the cursor changes depending on whether the hovered target is correct. If this selection period is completed, that target is selected. Target selection is followed by a **600ms waiting period** after which liquid reward and auditory cue signals the outcome of the selection. 

This target reach task is fashioned as a "typing task", i.e. the goal is to select specific sequences of targets, or letters.

Neural signals used were threshold-crossings.

## Results

### Task outcome-related neural differences

Trial-averaged PSTH based on task outcome showed signficant differences electrode-wise, in the period [-300, 600ms] with respect to selection onset.

### Online decoding of task outcome

This motivates decoding the task outcome from using activities from different lengths of time within this time-window, on a trial-by-trial basis. Decoder used was a linear SVM on five PC components. There can be multiple ways of performing the PCA dimensionality reduction:

1. Use the first n BMI trials as training trials. The task difficulty can be varied to achieve a certain success rate. Get the trial-average for different task outcomes, perform PCA on it, and train the SVM using the top five PCs.

  In subsequent trials, project the trials' activities in the same time window to the previously selected PCs, then run the SVM.

2. Initialization of the decoder same as above. However, with every new trial, the error-decoder can be run again. More trials would then lead to a more accurate decoder. As the authors noted, 

  > We found that decoding performance converged after a large quantity of approximately 2000 training trials, and that these decoders worked well across days.

3. Initialize outcome-decoder using previous days' data -- this was the approach taken during the online experiments.

### Online error-correction
Two methods of error-correction in the context of the experiment were implemented:

1. Error auto-deletion: After detecting that an error has happened, the previously selected target or "letter" will be deleted and the previous target will be cued again.

2. Error prevention: As the task-outcome can be decoded with decent accuracy before target selection is finalized, when an error outcome is detected, the required hold period is extended by 50ms, allowing the monkey more time to move the cursor. This is actually pretty clever.

They found that error prevention resulted in higher performance as measured by "bit-rate" for both monkeys.

### Outcome error signal details

The first worries coming to mind is whether these outcome error signals are in fact encoding the kinematic differences with respect to different trial outcomes. These kinematic differences include cursor movements and arm movements (monkey's arms were free to move).

Other confounding variables include (1) reward expectation (2) auditory feedback difference (3) colored cue differences.

To control for kinematic differences, three analysis were done:

1. Linear regression of the form $$y_k=Ax_k+b$$ were performed, where $$x_k$$ includes the cursor velocity or hand velocity, and $$y_k$$ represents neural activity vectors at time $$k$$. The residual $$y_k^{res}=y_k-Ax_k-b$$ were then used to classify task-outcome, and this did not affect the accuracy very much.

  This analysis makes sense, however, why do they only regress out either cursor or hand velocity, but not both at the same time??

2. Used either the hand or cursor velocity to decode trial-outcome. The results were significantly better than chance but also significantly worse than that using the putative error signal.

3. Because of the BMI paradigm, there is knowledge of the causual relationship between the neural activities and the cursor velocity, as defined by the matrix $$M$$ that linearly maps the two in the Kalman Filter equation. 

  From the fundamental theorem of linear algebra, we know that a matrix is only capable of mapping vectors into its row-space. This means the cursor velocity results only from the projection of the neural activity vectors into the $$M's$$ row-space. Shenoy and colleagues term this **output-potent** subspace of the neural population activities.

  In contrast, the **output-null** subspace is orthogonal to the **output-potent** subspace, and is therefore the null space of $$M$$. Thus, if the error-signal is unrelated to the neural acvitivies responsible for the decoded kinematics, we would expect it lying in the **output-null** subspace. Quantitatively, this means the projection of the task-outcome signal into the **output-null** subspace would explain for the majority of its variance.

  To extract the outcome-related signal, neural activities are first trial-averaged based on the task outcome (success or fail), then subtracted from each other. The row-space and null-space of $$M$$ are found from SVD. The outcome-related matrix ($$N\times T$$, N=number of neurons, T=number of time bins) are then projected into these spaces. The variances of these projections are calculated by first subtracting the row-means from each row then taking the sum of squared of all elements in the matrix. 

  It turns out that the variances of the outcome-signal explained by the projection into the null-space is much more than that explained by the row-space. A good result.

To visualize the error-signal, the principal components of the "difference-mode" of the neural activities were plotted. The idea of applying "common-mode" and "difference-mode" to neural activities is simlar to ANOVA quantifying the between-group and within-group variances. Common-mode neural activities is equal to trial-averaging regardless of task-outcomes. Difference-mode is equal to the difference between the trial-averaged success trials and failed trials.

To control for reward-expectation, experiments were controlled where rewards were delivered for every trial regardless of success. It was found this did not make a significant difference to the decoding performance. Not sure how they look, but according to [Ramakrishnan 2017](http://www.pnas.org/content/114/24/E4841.abstract), M1 and PMd neurons exhibit a decreased firing rate to lower-than-expected reward. This, combined with similar decoding performance is a good sign for this error-signal to be different from reward-expectation.

To control for auditory feedback, it was turned off, decoding performance did not decrease significantly.

To control for color cues, the color of the selected target stayed constant. The resulted in a significant, but minor (5%) performance decrease. May be due to the monkey's increase in uncertainty under the absence of color changes. Or maybe it is due to a change in execution-error -- the monkey expects the taraget to change, but it doesn't. More work needs to be done here.

It is very surprising that their monkeys performed so many trials under so many different conditions...in my experience they either freak out and perform terribly or just refuse, and we have to wait for them to get their shit together again.

### Execution-Error

Execution-error differs from outcome-error in that the former is execution sensitive. In this context, execution-error implies an error-signal that varies with where the correct target is with respect to the selected target. In contrast, outcome-error is simply whether the selected target is correct.

I am not convinced that the authors' definition is correct here. Techincally outcome-error should be if the monkey selects the letter "A" but the letter "B" appears, and execution-error is when the monkey wants to move the cursor left, but the cursor went in another direction.

Regardless, it was found the direction of the correct target explained a small percentage (~15%) of the error-signal variance. Very promising!

***

This paper has basically validated and performed my **planned** (focus on past tense) first stage experiments using BMI-controlled cursor tasks. Another thing to note is that PMd shows significant outcome-modulation earlier than M1, fitting with the role of that area.

Next step would probably be online adaptation of the decoder informed by the error-signal. An important point yet to be addressed is that, degrading and nonstationary signals motivate online adaptation, the error-signal decoder would also require adaptation. This adaptation in the case of BMI-controlled typing is simple -- is the backspace being pressed? In other tasks, external knowledge still needs to be known...

